{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 SourceSansPro-Light;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs36 \cf0 # Data and methods\
\
To analyze the opinions of non-American anti-TIP NGOs, from July\'96December 2014 we surveyed over 500 organizations engaged in anti-trafficking initiatives in 133 countries worldwide. To maximize out reach, we searched the State Department's annual TIP reports and Wikileaks cables for mentions of TIP NGOS. We also conducted hundreds of internet searches and partnered with a US-based organization.^[See the Global Modern Slavery Directory, [http://globalmodernslavery.org](http://globalmodernslavery.org), maintained by the Polaris Project.] This produced a database of 1,100 anti-TIP NGOs. We invited each organization to participate in the study. Of the 1,100 organizations, we found valid contact information for X and received responses from X unique organizations, yielding a response rate of XX%\'97a rate that is comparable to or exceeds that of other NGO surveys [see @citeme; @citeme2]. Because NGOs often work in multiple countries, we allowed respondents to answer a series of country-specific questions for up to five different countries, resulting in X country-organization responses. The majority of respondents (415, or 86.5%) chose to answer for only one country, while 65 respondents reported on TIP work in two or more countries. \
\
Our choice to conduct an online survey poses several methodological issues. Collecting data solely through the internet introduces technology and language bias. Collecting data solely through the internet introduces technology and language bias. Small grassroots organizations without an online presence are completely missing from our database. Some NGOs mentioned in Wikileaks cables or State Department reports were absent online, perhaps because they no longer operate. Additionally, NGOs without easy internet access faced barriers to participation. As a result, the survey does not represent the entire sector. Finally, all surveys have response bias\'97willingness to participate is rarely random.\
\
We took several additional steps to address these biases and threats to validity, based on the methods used by @Buthe:2011. To encourage participation, we sent each NGO a set of three personalized e-mail invitations, re-sent approximately every two weeks. Organizations without a working e-mail address were contacted by phone. Finally, we posted an invitation to participate in the survey in a LinkedIn discussion group used by anti-trafficking NGOs. Each invitation included a link to the survey and an offer to complete the survey via phone, and respondents were allowed to remain anonymous. To reduce language barriers, we translated the survey into Spanish and Russian and encouraged respondents to answer all free-response questions in their native language. We provided additional reminders and assistance to respondents who began the survey but did not complete it (often due to technological issues). The vast majority of respondents (463, or 96.5%) completed the survey online; 14 were completed over the phone and 3 were collected via the LinkedIn invitation.\
\
Finally, to avoid response-bias and cueing respondents who might have particular views of the US, we framed the survey as an effort to better understand the anti-TIP advocacy sector in general. To reinforce this emphasis, we first asked respondents about their organizations in general and their knowledge of TIP issues in the countries they work in, and then asked which actors (embassies, NGOs, international organizations, etc.) had been active in those countries, allowing them to volunteer information about the US embassy without prompting.  Only *after this* did we ask questions specifically about the presence and quality of the United States' anti-TIP work. In \{x\} instances, respondents did not initially list the US as an active anti-TIP player in the free response question, but later indicated US support and advocacy, which suggests that the NGOs did not decide to participate in the survey based on their prior opinions of the United States. Additionally, \{X\} percent of respondents completed the survey after beginning it, revealing that NGOs generally did not change their decision to participate once the survey turned to US-focused questions. The statement in our invitations that the principal investigator was a professor at an American university was the only indication that the survey could contain questions related specifically to the United States. However, the invitation emphasized that the purpose of the survey was to help build a complete database of anti-TIP NGOs and to understand their efforts. The language of the invitation and the entire survey can be found at \{URL HERE\}. Thus, opinions of the US and its anti-TIP efforts are unlikely to have influenced decisions to participate in the survey, reducing response-{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://76FD7803-D47C-4296-BAB2-769B9FA69BE0"}}{\fldrslt bias.}}\
\
In our analysis, we merge survey responses with several supplementary data sources in order to compare NGO experiences with more quantitative country-level characteristics. We calculate each country's average TIP rating between 2000\'962015, as well as the absolute change in rating from the first year to the most recent year each country was included in the TIP report.^[Coded as 1, 2, and 3 for each tier level and 2.5 for countries on the Watchlist.] We use data from the 3P Anti-trafficking Policy Index to measure each country's visible progress in improving human anti-trafficking prosecution, protection, and prevention [@Cho:2015]. This index is based exclusively on independent assessments of the annual TIP report and measures progress in a host of specific sub-indicators, ultimately yielding a score between 3\'9615, with higher numbers indicating better progress.^[See [http://www.economics-human-trafficking.net/data-and-reports.html](http://www.economics-human-trafficking.net/data-and-reports.html).] We look at both the official TIP ratings and the 3P index because the two indicators measure different phenomena. TIP ratings reflect formal US diplomatic pressure and act as a form of scorecard diplomacy [@KelleySimmons:2014], while the 3P index reflects the progress that governments have made in improving the legal environment for managing TIP issues. As with the raw tier ratings, we calculate each country's average TIP policy index and the absolute change between the first and most recent year. Finally, we use the sum of political rights and civil liberties from Freedom House's *Freedom in the World* index as a proxy for a country's level of democratization.^[See [https://freedomhouse.org/report-types/freedom-world](https://freedomhouse.org/report-types/freedom-world).]\
\
For the sake of simplicity, we do not use advanced statistical methods or models, turning instead to basic summary statistics and cross-tabulations. The statistical findings we report are solely descriptive and serve to help interpret many of the trends we discovered in the anti-TIP NGO sector. We use inferential statistics (such as *t*-tests and chi-square tests) only to check for differences in means and associations between responses, not to test *a priori* hypotheses selected to prove or disprove any theories. \
\
In addition to statistical analysis, we rely heavily on interpretive qualitative analysis of NGOs' free response answers\'9782% of respondents chose to answer at least one of the 12 open-ended questions. One of this study's primary contributions is to allow NGOs themselves to speak about their experiences, and as such, we extensively quote their responses. To maintain anonymity (even when NGOs expressed willingness to be identified), we removed all potentially identifiable information from any quotes used in this paper, indicating the source of each quote with a randomly-assigned four-digit ID number. \
}