{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 SourceSansPro-Light;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs36 \cf0 # Data and methods\
\
To measure and collect the opinions of non-American anti-TIP NGOs, from July\'96December 2014 we conducted a survey of more than 500 organizations engaged in anti-trafficking initiatives in 133 countries worldwide. In order to maximize the reach of the survey, we analyzed the State Department's annual TIP reports, searched Wikileaks cables mentioning TIP discussions and negotiations, conducted hundreds of internet searches, and partnered with a US-based organization building a similar directory of organizations^[See the Global Modern Slavery Directory, [http://globalmodernslavery.org](http://globalmodernslavery.org), maintained by the Polaris Project.] to identify as many active organizations as possible and create a comprehensive database of 1,100 anti-TIP NGOs. In an effort to collect as many diverse responses as possible, we did not survey a random sample of these organizations, but instead sent each organization an invitation to participate in the study. Of the 1,100 organizations, we found valid contact information for X and received responses from X unique organizations, yielding a response rate of XX%\'97a rate that is comparable to or exceeds that of other NGO surveys [see @citeme; @citeme2]. Because NGOs often work in multiple countries, we allowed respondents to answer a series of country-specific questions for up to five different countries, resulting in X country-organization responses. \
\
Our choice to conduct an online survey of every organization in our database poses several methodological issues. Collecting data solely through the internet introduces technology and language bias. In our search for anti-TIP NGOs we inadvertently omitted any organization without an internet presence\'97while we were able to find hundreds of larger NGOs, small grassroots organizations with staff that don't speak English or that lack technological skills (or desire) to create an online presence are completely missing from our database. We were unable to identify or contact several NGOs mentioned in Wikileaks cables and State Department reports because of their absence online. Additionally, NGOs without adequate technological equipment or easy access to the internet faced barriers to participation. Finally, the results are not necessarily representative of the entire sector and are thus subject to selection bias\'97organizations that were inherently willing to participate were more likely to do so when invited.\
\
We took several additional steps to attempt to overcome these biases and threats to validity, based on the methods used by @Buthe:2011 in their survey-based research of global firms. To boost the survey's response rate and include more reluctant organizations, we sent each NGO a set of three personalized e-mail invitations, re-sent approximately every two weeks. Organizations without a working e-mail address were contacted by phone. Each invitation included a link to the survey and an offer to complete the survey over the phone or through Skype (for organizations facing technological barriers), and respondents were allowed to remain anonymous. In an effort to reduce language barriers, we translated the survey into Spanish and Russian and encouraged respondents to answer all free-response questions in their native language. We provided additional reminders and assistance to respondents who began the survey but did not complete it (often due to technological issues). Finally, in our series of invitations we attempted to convey the importance of the survey and its results for better understanding the anti-TIP advocacy sector in general. \
\
Finally, we attempted to eliminate the possibility that NGOs with unfavorable opinions of the United States might bias and color their responses. To remedy this, we asked organizations specifically about their work with human trafficking advocacy broadly and specifically did not initially frame the survey around their experiences with the US We first asked respondents about their organizations in general and their knowledge of TIP issues in the countries they work in, and then asked which actors (embassies, NGOs, international organizations, etc.) had been active in those countries, allowing them to volunteer information about the US embassy if it came to them naturally.  After this, we began asking questions specifically about the presence and quality of the United States' anti-TIP work. In \{x\} instances, respondents did not initially list the US as an active anti-TIP player in the free response question, but later indicated US support and advocacy, which is indicative that the NGOs did not decide to participate in the survey based on their prior opinions of the United States. Additionally, \{X\} percent of respondents completed the survey after beginning it, revealing that NGOs generally did not change their decision to participate once the survey turned to US-focused questions. Our series of invitations, which that the principal investigator was a professor at an American university, was the only indication that the survey could contain questions related specifically to the United States. However, the invitation emphasized that the purpose of the survey was to help build a complete database of anti-TIP NGOs and to understand their efforts. We thus feel that any prior anti-American opinions did not bias the survey responses.\
\
We analyze this data using simple summary and statistics and cross-tabulations + combining with external data like the 3P Anti-Trafficking Policy Index [@Cho:2015]. \{More on the 3P index\} \
\
\{How we use free response answers; again, letting NGOs speak about their experiences; giving them an anonymous, protected voice\}\
}